imagine being backstage at an event
being brought to tears because you know
the material you're going to present is
at odds with your
authenticity well in today's episode of
keys from Keynotes I chat with Valerie
Garcia and she tells her story of this
breaking point where she realized she
needed to be doing something different
Valerie had a very comfortable amazing
full-time job but she took the leap she
decided to become a full-time keynote
speaker she also incorporates a little
bit of coaching with that as well but
she talks about what it took to make
that leap that transition because it's
not an easy thing to do and how she has
built her business as a keynote speaker
from there we talk about the subject of
delivering authentically from the stage
what does that look like how do you
ensure that you deliver a presentation
that is giving maximum value and
authenticity to your audience and from
there we tackle a few other questions
such as how does Valerie prepare for her
speeches does she practice how does she
handle audience Q&A does she get nervous
all sorts of ground is covered on this
episode I truly hope you enjoy it well
hi there and welcome to keys from
Keynotes an interview series that Taps
into the knowledge and expertise from
some of the world's greatest public
speakers and on this the fourth episode
of keys from Keynotes I'm I'm joined by
author coach and keynote speaker Valerie
Garcia a self-proclaimed closet
introvert Valerie has taken her two
decades of experience in the corporate
world and 10 plus years of
entrepreneurial experience to create
keynote speeches that Inspire those who
want to get unstuck and make bold moves
Valerie's book we're going to need cake
celebrating authentic leadership in a
messy world will be released August 22nd
2024 Valerie welcome to keys from
Keynotes
thank you I'm so excited to be here
excited to have a conversation with you
and of course this project this podcast
is something that I kind of do on the
side aside from my full-time job which
is working with Remax Canada but the
reason I bring up Remax is because
that's how we met I believe nearly a
decade ago you were working for Remax
Ontario Atlantic I was with Remax of
western Canada at the time and we had
the chance to meet and collaborate a
little bit at conferences and then I
watched your career because you made
this bold move a number of years ago
deciding to step aside and take on
full-time keynote speaking maybe an
element of coaching there as well so the
question is what prompted you to make
that jump and what went into actually
making that a
reality well that's a big question and
are we calling it a bold move or crazy
uh that's that's the real question um
yeah you know it was a really it was a
big step and looking back I think I'm
far enough away from it now where I feel
like oh maybe it wasn't that big of a
deal but it was I left a very
comfortable full-time job with a great
boss and a great company um and
benefits and a paycheck regularly um and
I jumped into a world where I you know I
was really taking a risk I was on my own
I had a morgage I wasn't sure how I was
going to be able to pay that or if I was
going to be able to pay that but it
really all started um with a
conversation that I talk about a lot in
my book um and that was a day where I
was sitting backstage waiting to go on
stage at a Remax corporate event and
that day I was supposed to speak to all
of our leaders and all of our um
stakeholders and tell them like how
great everything was and how how amazing
we were doing and our numbers were great
and we're crushing it and you know all
of that um and instead I was sitting
backstage in a utility closet
crying and I remember that day very
clearly um because my boss came in and
sat with me and I just remember saying I
it's I need to do something different uh
it's time for me to just stop putting a
smile on my face and getting on stage
and start talking about some different
things I was struggling deeply with with
depression at the time um I was I was
suicidal um and I was getting on stage
every day with a big smile on my face
saying we're doing great um and inside I
was I was struggling really hard um and
so at the time it didn't feel like the
answer was hey quit your job become
unemployed um and start talking about
hard things from stage um but that's
what I did and amazingly people wanted
to hear those things they wanted to hear
the real stuff uh the hard things um and
yeah that's that's kind of how it
started well I think bold move is the
right term to use outside of crazy
because you were connecting to to your
why and and your purpose and and
something deeper there but then I would
imagine to go and actually do that is a
huge step what what was involved to
ensure that that was successful to
ensure that wasn't a thing where you
tried to do this for a year and realized
okay financially I'm not able to
continue I need to go back into that
security of a nine-to-five job what
steps were required to be a full-time
speaker well I won't lie I will say that
for the first two years I woke up every
single day thinking maybe I should get a
real job um literally every single day
for two years it was a
constant um it was a constant struggle
against against fear um and it was a lot
of the fear was in my own head I'm not
good enough people don't care they don't
want to hear what I have to say um am I
you know am I going to make a
difference and that took practice
honestly to
overcome um you know for 20 years before
that I had taught salespeople how to
sell and I really had to take all of the
things that I had been teaching for 20
years and apply it to myself I had to
get up every day and tell myself that
fear that's running around in your brain
is a liar you have to call people you
have to prospect you have to work your
database you have to show up um you have
to add value and you know every single
day for the first couple of years was a
was a fight against those little lies in
my head that just kind of show up
whenever things get
scary um and then of course covid
happened and that was the year I lost
every single speaking gig that I had
scheduled for the entire year in one
Fell Swoop one one week it was all gone
um and that was the year that I would
scheduled to be you know it had had I
had enough under contract to hit my
highest number ever um and so again had
to Pivot had to start thinking what do I
do differently um and all I kept telling
myself in that time is how do I help as
many people as cheaply as possible Right
Now how do I you know so I was on Zoom 7
hours a day and I was making calls and I
was uh you know I was looking for ways
to Pivot
and looking back now I mean those years
were hard but I'm so thankful for what
they taught me because I wake up now and
every once in a great while I have that
little voice in my head and I know
exactly what to do I'm just like shut
the hell up and get to work there's
there's a couple things I want to unpack
there so the first I want to come back
to the digital side and and the zoom
conversations but before that was there
increased pressure like I can only
imagine once you go it on your own and
now you are your own brand and you are
the speaker and somebody hires you how
did that pressure compare to when you
were taking the stage from a corporate
rule when you knew uh the worst that
could go here is if I don't do my best I
know I'll probably be on stage next
month for our next event and they're
going to still have faith in me like
what sort of increase pressure did you
feel um you know I don't know that I
ever felt that way I think I've always
approached every talk that I've given
the same way which is um I want to do I
want to I want to speak the words that I
meant to speak to the people that are in
the audience today and I want to do the
very best I can for them so whether I've
been speaking for a brand or myself it's
in that moment it's always there is
someone in this audience today that is
here just for what I'm going to say and
and I want to make sure that they get
those words um and so I think about that
before I take the stage at every single
event I just always think somebody's
here for those words and I'm going to
make sure I do the best I can so you
know I don't I'm not one of those PE I
know you're going to get to this but I'm
not one of those people that get super
nervous um I get excited I get excited
to bring exactly what I'm supposed to
bring to the table every time and so
when it comes to the transition you made
during covid with more digital present
ations how do those compare like how
does a speaker or are there differences
do you approach a digital presentation
the same as being in front of a crowd
physically on stage what's the
differences there yeah there's a huge
difference and um it's it's honestly
it's a lot more work digitally it's
harder to connect with the audience uh
you don't hear them laughing um you
don't get to see necessarily their
facial expressions um if they're on
camera that's great if they're off
camera you don't really know if they're
otherwise distracted um so a couple of
things that you know I made sure I'm
always standing when I'm doing something
virtually because then I'm going to be
using my you know using my hands I'm
going to be using my body language I'm
going to move around um I'm going to be
less static than when I'm just sitting
in a chair um I'm also trying to ask
questions I'm constantly telling my
clients look if you have an opportunity
to turn on chat to to make them have
their cameras on to you know have polls
to ask questions um anytime that we can
get some
interaction that's what we want um
because yeah digital is harder and let
me tell you seven hours of Zoom a day
during 2020 was
exhausting exhausting uh for for myself
and for the audience because you know we
were all sort of sitting in front of
Zoom all day um but you know I think we
all learned a lot from that I think we
learned that there are ways that we can
still will interact digitally I think
they're it made us all better speakers
and better engagers um you know in terms
of prep I would make sure that slides
that I used had some sort of
entertainment value not just educational
that they were more fun to look at that
they were more colorful um and all of
those may seem like small things but if
you're going to sit and stare at the
screen for 60 minutes it needs to be
something interesting so you know I'm
putting pictures of llama on there and
you know gorillas and things that make
people smile
because we needed it you know we needed
to be able to smile in order to get
through it so your book is all about
celebrating authenticity and going back
to that example that you started this
interview with of you had to give this
presentation which wasn't your authentic
self you had to Rave about the numbers
everything was great and there was an
internal conflict that you were having
the reality for some people probably is
that when they're delivering
presentations or
speeches there may not be that situation
where they can always
speak it might be something that a
certain message that they have to give
even if that's hard so how can somebody
ensure that they're staying authentic no
matter what type of speech it is that
they're delivering when they take the
stage it's a great question um I think a
lot of it just comes down to
you know you mentioned your why in the
beginning and I think that's kind of a
it's gotten to be kind of an overused or
maybe even cheesy way to look at it but
it really comes down to your personal
values you know what do you most believe
and what do you want people to take away
from it and yeah I mean I've worked with
people who are giving presentations
where they're reading off really boring
charts and graphs to a board of
directors and they're not going to get
up there and put Llamas on the screen
right they're not in a position where
it's about
um you know making people laugh it's
about getting them to believe the
numbers but I think that at the end of
the day no matter what you're presenting
you can still do it with authenticity in
terms of I'm going to be true to myself
I'm going to be true to the the person
that I am um I'm going to stand here and
be in my body and in my own tone of
voice you and I have both seen very
famous people get on stage and give
speeches where you think my God they
just read that whole thing from a
teleprompter they didn't I didn't get to
know them at all it was just a bunch of
pre-recorded words essentially um I
think we can all bring our own sense of
service or emotion or care Factor um to
anything that we're presenting and I
think if we're good at it we will um you
know I've seen a lot of people where I
think gosh I could have just listened to
you know anybody speak for an hour I
don't even know who you are um so
however or you know wherever we are
presenting we have to show up as
ourselves that's how people are going to
believe us right that's how they're
going to believe that we mean what we're
saying your book releases a little bit
later this month probably right around
the time that this episode is going to
be released I'm curious how does writing
a book compare with writing a
speech oh
well um I think I'd rather write a
speech any day of the
week
um writing a speech is like finding a
really good story and then finding a way
to drive it home a book is like finding
12 really great stories and then tying
them all together it's um I will say
that by the time I was halfway through
the book I was saying to my editor like
why did I do this
um I'm really proud of it and I'm glad I
pushed through and finished it but you
know it's a lot more work it's a lot
more like how does this all tie together
and what is the single thread and um I
think it's made me a better speech
writer I think it's made me a better
speaker because I need to be more
concise um you know my editor would come
back and go Val you need to cut half
this chapter out or you know you said
way too much about this and
um I just found that sometimes we just
have to get to the point um as opposed
to just fluffing it up with a whole
bunch of extra words and I have found
that you know as I give a talk now I can
get to that point a little quicker a
little easier a little more comfortably
having you know had to chop a whole
bunch out of a book you mention stories
there and on your website it says you
believe stories can and should change
the world why is storytelling essential
when it comes to giving a great
speech I think storytelling is essential
to everything um I think storytelling is
essential to great leadership I think
it's essential to giving a great
speech I think you know I have this
saying never tell a story without a
point and never make a point without a
story um I think the only way we can
ever capture people's
hearts is through story and I think a
lot of us we tend to try and capture
people's minds through numbers and
charts and graphs and stats but we can't
ever change the way people act if we
don't start with how they
feel um we're never going to change
people's behaviors through their heads
and their minds we are only ever going
to change them through their emotions
and their feelings and so great speakers
know that they make people feel things
they make people cry and laugh and
question and turn to the person next to
them and go holy crap did you know that
or say me too I thought I was the only
one um you know great speakers have a
story before they have a point um and I
think that same is true for leaders I
love that what goes into your process
for for building a speech from the point
of okay you know you have a gig let's
say it's coming up two months from now
you're going to deliver an hour speech
what goes into building that speech and
then what does your practice routine
look like leading up to that if you have
a practice routine so I typically start
with a big idea so whether that is a
joke or a title or an image or a place I
want to end up at the end you know that
sort of the Dismount um I always have
that one thing that I want to sort of
start with and typically those just kind
of come to me like I'll hear something
about some random fact about
elephants and immediately my brain will
be like how do I make a story out of
that to to teach a lesson um and so I'll
kind of work backwards from the big
thing uh whatever that is the one thing
that I want to leave in your heart and
your mind um and I always build my
presentations in canva so they're very
visual heavy there's very few words if
I'm using slides at all um I just want
people to be able to see things that
make them
feel um and so I typically spend some
time putting together a bunch of images
that bring out the stories that I want
to tell that kind of lead down the path
of getting to that big
idea and then I present it I don't
really have a I don't have a practice
process um I know that sounds crazy um
spend the time sort of writing the story
in my head and then it comes out um I've
had say people say to me like oh that's
crazy that you don't practice but um
it's not the way my brain works I love
that and it's one of the cool things
knowing that there's different ways to
be really great and really successful at
speaking and for some people like
myself I'm crazy in the sense that I
have to like practice and practice and
practice just so I feel comfortable and
familiar but I do think that puts me at
risk at times from taking away from
maybe some of the the authenticity or at
least ability to adapt if there's a
situation where the slides aren't
working or something's happening and you
need to adapt to the environment but for
you being able to to just do that and be
genuinely kind of from the heart and
deliver it I think is really powerful
but have you ever had that situation
where maybe something doesn't go how you
thought it might maybe the room's not
reacting maybe you have an AV failure
you put all that work into these canva
presentations and then the slides aren't
even showing and how did you deal with
that yeah of course I mean that's it's
going to happen if it hasn't happened to
you or anybody it will at some point is
always going to happen um I've had
events where the power went out um and
the AV never reset I have had events
where I've walked in and I use a Mac and
and it doesn't connect to a single thing
in the space um I have had events
where you know like literally everything
that could go wrong has gone wrong with
AV or Tech um yeah and you just tend to
have to roll with it to be honest I mean
there have been times where when the
time when the power went out you know we
just sort of gathered everybody in a
circle close and we sat around and and
sort of workshopped it um I think the
pros and cons of my process are this the
good thing is is that I feel like I can
go off the cuff maybe the con would be
that you're never going to get exactly
the same speech twice so I've worked
with other speakers on the same circuit
where you know we've done five cities in
five days and I've heard their exact
same speech to the word five days in a
row to the point where at the end of it
I could give their speech and I always
am a little amazed at like wow like you
you know like you have that Spa on like
every minute I'm not like that I'm I'm
going to tell a story based on somebody
who's in the audience and I'm going to
pull in the guy in the front row and
it's always a little bit more off the
cuff for me but the good thing for me is
that I know the big idea is at the end
and I'm always going to get there
however you know whatever Road I take
I'm going to end up at that same
destination it's funny that you name
that as a con I see that as a pro
because you are customizing your
presentation I think the other side of
it kind of the cookie cutter it's the
same and I understand what you're saying
because maybe there's an event organizer
who sees a speaker and loves it and
they're like we want this exact thing at
their event so I do understand that
perspective how do you deal with
audience Q&A is that something you
incorporate in all of your presentations
welcoming that and how do you deal with
difficult
questions so typically I will speak to
an organizer before an event and ask
them how they prefer to take Q&A or
what's worked well in the past when it's
it's a huge room thousands of people it
can be really difficult you know I'm
really aware of whether or not other
people in the room can hear the question
um I think that's one of the most
frustrating things is when everyone's
yelling repeat the question um right so
I want to make sure uh I'm also one of
those speakers that well I will always
use a mic you know how some speakers are
like no no no I'm loud enough but you
don't know that one person in the back
of the room is wearing hearing aids or
is diff you know is has difficulty
hearing so I always am really cognizant
of that so if it's a huge room um it
might be something where I use an
interactive Tech Tool and allow them to
you know text the questions so they can
be put up on a screen um I I'll you know
I'll utilize that if possible if it's a
smaller space um and it's possible I
will walk into the audience with a
microphone and I will have the
conversations if I can um so I want to
make it feel like we're talking not just
you're shouting at me and I'm shouting
back at you um and difficult questions
are always going to happen you're always
going to get somebody that asks a
question you don't know the answer to or
you don't want to give the answer to
because you know where it's going to
lead um and one of the very best things
that I learned really early on in my
career was to say that's a great
question let's talk about it afterwards
or you know what that's not a great
question for this big of a space but
come find me afterwards and I would love
to talk to to you about it and saying
that confidently and firmly is a skill
um and you know it's also a skill to say
you know it's a great question I don't
know the answer to it but I can find out
so come find me afterwards and give me
your information and let me find out for
you the more comfortable we are with
saying I don't know or not right now the
better we are going to be as speakers
and the more our audience will
appreciate it because no one in the
audience wants to hear you sit there and
argue with somebody over
something you had said that you don't
get so much nervous as you do excited
what ises the the rate before you take
the stage look like though I mean do you
have a do you have a process do you do
something particular that morning do you
like listen to a PumpUp song is it just
a matter of not you're sat there they
call you up you walk up like any little
piece there that would be helpful of how
do you approach that day of
yeah I typically do a quick scroll
through my slides um just to kind of
remember my pacing and my stories um the
best advice I have ever given anybody on
this is know the first line that is
going to come out of your
mouth if you know the very first
sentence that is going to come out of
your mouth everything gets easier from
there and so if you go up there and
you're still trying to process like
what's the first thing I'm going to say
that's why you get nervous service and
so I tend to think of a a joke or an
opening line I I typically tend to like
to go right into a story I don't like
those speakers that walk up and spend
the first 10 minutes introducing
themselves you just heard my bio it's
all good move on I like to go straight
into a story get people's attention get
them immediately paying attention
instead of looking at their phone um but
that first line is really important if
you've got that first line you're good
so typically before a talk I will look
through my slides I'll make sure I know
exactly what is the first thing that I'm
going to say and then I will close my
slides and I will say to myself I just
want to deliver this in a way that
someone in this audience takes this away
I just like I want the right words for
that one person and then I go on the
stage and I picture that that one person
is getting exactly what they need u i
don't try and make everybody in the
entire audience laugh and I'm never
going to win over 100% there's always
going to be one two people in that room
that go GH and that's okay they weren't
my audience today so I focus on the
people that I can serve and I do the
very best I can that's a very mature
approach that you've taken when I
started speaking my why before I took
the stage was probably the wrong
motivation one of the biggest reasons I
loved speaking was words that I'd get
afterward if it went really well and
people would high- five me and say wait
you crushed it and I craved that but I
realized that wasn't sustainable and so
over time I had to change my why into
what can the audience really get that
they will get value from how can I serve
them best but what about for you did you
always kind of have that mature attitude
about your approach to speaking or was
it something that took time to arrive
at you know um I talk about this in the
book as well uh I I wasn't always like
this um I really wanted to like I think
in the beginning because a lot of my
initial speaking was corporate
training I think my my key motivation
was to get people to do something right
A lot of it was use this technology use
this tool um do this thing um and so a
lot of my initial speaking was along the
lines of trying to motivate or or compel
people to take action it wasn't so much
about my ego or even about people
clapping it was like I just wanted to
get you to do the
thing and uh I talk about this this
event in my book I had a day where um
you know I felt like I did really well
but I had this one guy in the back of
the room who was clearly not on board he
you know he sat in the back with his
arms crossed the whole time he was a
Heckler he was very negative he asked
questions that were really
disruptive and um at the end of that
talk you know I was frustrated but I
felt like I want him over I felt like
you know like I had made some progress
and a couple days later I got the survey
results the feedback from that talk
because the organizer had had done a a
survey and I remember there
being you know some positive reactions
there were some you know
but overall there were comments along
the lines of she turned cartwheels for
the one person that was never going to
get it at the expense of the rest of
us and that was a really it was a key
moment for me in my speaking career to
realize
like that one person is not my audience
my main goal in talk is not it cannot be
to win over the one negative Nelly in
the room because it will come at the
expense of everyone else I cannot chase
the one at the expense of the
99 and yeah I mean I think that's what
really changed my viewpoint of I want I
want that one person that really needs
it but that can't be my sole Focus for
the entire talk I cannot be focused on
that one person um at the expense of
everybody else and so I think that's
where my sort of my process started Ed
of right before I go on stage I think
whoever that one person is I hope this I
hope this hits them where they need it
to be and then I you know and then we
gather everybody together um so yeah it
was something I had to learn I love that
story Val and I'm curious kind of from
the business perspective so you know in
terms of getting feedback you had
mentioned there on the corporate side
that you know sometimes event organizers
will send out those surveys get that
feedback or information
as an entrepreneur as somebody who's
taken on kind of this full-time keynote
speaker role what is your process to get
that feedback understanding that you're
not going to please everybody you're not
going to win the whole room over but how
do you ensure that basically the event
organizer realizes oh wow this audience
did connect with me because from the
business case that will give me more
opportunities in the
future yeah so you don't always get the
surveys it's really nice when do even
when there are some constructive or even
negative um comments in there you can
learn from all of them so I love it when
there are surveys or when there's
structured feedback um if an organizer
is not doing a structured feedback
process um I tend to try and ask
everybody that speaks to me afterwards
um you know they'll come up and be like
oh that was great and instead of just
saying thanks I'll say what what was it
what was the one thing you're going to
take away or what was that piece that
really resonated with you or um you know
I always try and push for that little
bit of a detail um I also if there's
time you know and we do Q&A I'll sort of
ask everybody in the room like anybody
want to share one thing that they're
going to take action on as a result of
this or that they're gonna so I'll try
and um you know I'll try and start that
conversation um and then you know I'll
have people that will connect with me on
social after an event and I'll you know
I'll ask them as well like what are you
what are you taking away what are you
doing this like what has changed in your
department as a um result of this so I
think it really a lot of it is the onus
is on us to kind of ask those questions
not just oh thanks I'm so glad you loved
it you know like totally like what was
it you know what was the one
thing so much good advice shared
throughout this in a second I'm going to
ask you the same three questions that I
ask every guest of keys from Keynotes so
we'll get to those in a moment but
before that given the fact that you've
made this jump you went from full-time
job to something that you know you're
passionate about being truly authentic
what advice would you give to somebody
who is thinking about doing the same
thing maybe they have a real knack for
speaking it's a skill set that they have
they want to go it on their own what's
something you wish you knew day one that
you learned maybe a little bit
in
um networking is key like I had an idea
of how important it was was but I had no
idea really how important it was um I
had spent 20 years creating
relationships in you know Industries and
I'm really thankful for that I think
anyone who's thinking of doing this you
have to be able to have conversations
it's about prospecting it's about
networking it's about talking to people
hey oh your husband works for this
company does his company ever put on
events like it's literally at that point
of asking for the business in the
beginning and um you know I'm really
thankful that that is something I
learned as quickly as I did um because I
have a really comfortable database at
this point um but it's really hard to
just say I would like to speak and have
people find you right you have to get
out there you have to make the calls you
have to tell people that you're
available you have to talk about what
you're passionate about um and I think
that's the best advice ever is just
network network as much as possible love
it okay so as I mentioned the same three
questions to every guest of keys from
Keynotes the first question who is
personally your favorite keynote
speaker
um W okay um can I have two yeah
absolutely okay so I would say Berne
Brown um
because she's just one of those people
that I like I would love to just have
dinner with her and just pick her brain
um
and yeah I would also say Jeremy gy uh
Jeremy's a Canadian he's in Toronto he
runs Tren Hunter he's the most energetic
and like the way his brain works uh
speaker I have ever known and I've
gotten to speak with him a number of
times and um yeah just two very
different speakers ber is very calm and
very um specific and Jeremy is all over
the place but I have learned so much
from both of them love that I remember
Jeremy his visuals were insane it was
just constantly videos playing behind
him great answer second question what is
your most embarrassing speaking
moment
oh oh my God I don't even know
[Music]
um I don't know I I mean I've definitely
gone on stage
sick like so like not going to make it
through this sick um I think those had
the potential to be very
embarrassing
um I would just I would I don't nothing
comes to mind in terms of one
specifically but I would say any any
time that I've left and felt like Val
you did not prepare you are you were not
ready for this um those are always the
moments and that doesn't happen very
often anymore but I definitely had some
in the beginning where I was like girl
no you need to work harder um and maybe
the audience wouldn't tell you that but
for me those were the ones where when I
can feel it you know I'm I'm harder on
myself than anyone else final question
if you could speak at any venue in the
world where would it
be oo any venue we talking like a
physical space or an
audience however you want to answer it
okay so like my dream client I will say
is I would love to to work for Crayola
at one of their events yeah uh that's
sort of like top bucket list I would
love to work at a Crayola event I just
feel like that is
like I think for me it was like as a kid
crayons were like the the creativity
thing and I feel like that's the
audience that would be just so much fun
I can't wait to follow along on your
journey and then see the moment you do
speak for Crayola and send you a message
and be like Val you did it this clip
back Valerie this has been an awesome
conversation thank you so much for
joining me on this episode of keys from
Keynotes oh thanks for having me